docs/test: Documentation for image validation, improve validation test coverage (#88)
sse-secure-systems/connaisseur: docs/validation.md

# Validation

This document describes the image validation process as employed by Connaisseur.

> Since Connaisseur is a Kubernetes AdmissionController it works on requests and has these requests, the Kubernetes API, the registry and and the notary to work with. First off, Connaisseur does some light checks on the semantics of the request it receives, e.g. whether it is capable of using the API version of the admission request.

Reviewer: `and and`

Also, I find "works on" and "work with" in the same sentence a bit confusing.

> Since Connaisseur is a Kubernetes AdmissionController it works on requests and has these requests, the Kubernetes API, the registry and and the notary to work with. First off, Connaisseur does some light checks on the semantics of the request it receives, e.g. whether it is capable of using the API version of the admission request.

Reviewer: `and and`

Also, I find "works on" and "work with" in the same sentence a bit confusing.

2. The best matching rule from the image policy is looked up and if `verify: false`, the image is admitted.
3. Trust data of the image is consulted as described in the next section.

## Validation of trust data

Validation of trust data on a high level boils down to two steps:

1. Get all trusted (i.e. signed) image digests related to the tag or digest of the image.
2. If there is exactly one, admit the image.

> Regarding the latter step, rejection upon no matching trusted digests is obvious. However, Connaisseur also needs to reject the image if there is more than one trusted digest since Connaisseur has no context to choose which of the digests the initial tag should be mutated to. Doing so would potentially constitute changing the code you see deployed in your Kubernetes cluster. This means you cannot tag two different images with the same tag (or you need to scrub your notary server of the previous trust data).

Reviewer 2: ```
This means you cannot tag two different images with the same tag (or you need to scrub your notary server of the previous trust data).
```

To my knowledge, there is only one scenario where 2 different digests could appear for the same image tag and connaisseur can't decide which to take. 

That is when 2 different delegations sign different images under the same image + tag. So let's say delegation 'del1' signs `image:tag` resulting in digest `123` and then 'del2' takes the same image, does some modifications and resigns, resulting in digest `456`. Now in the notary there will be 2 files: *del1.json* that says `image:tag` has digest `123` and *del2.json* that says `image:tag` has digest `456`.
This setup in itself is no problem, as there is an additional file called *releases.json* that has the most up-to-date digest for `image:tag`, which would be `456`. The problem occurs when both 'del1' and 'del2' are required to be signers according to the image policy. The we expect them to have signed the exact same image and look whether the digests in *del1.json* and *del2.json* are the same (which they are not). In this case we would have two different digest and don't know whom to trust more.

**ANYWAYS**, what I'm trying to say is, it's not really an issue that two different images have the same tag. There is just this one edge case, that makes things a bit complicated.

Author: Ok, so the part of "Conny doesnt have the context" is not quite accurate and should be "at this point we havent given Conny the ability to distinguish (and in some edge case it will fail)"?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the latter step, rejection upon no matching trusted digests is obvious. However, Connaisseur also needs to reject the image if there is more than one trusted digest, since at this point in time Connaisseur doesn't have the ability to distinguish between the right and wrong trusted digest. This only occurs in some edge cases, but nonetheless has to be addressed.
```

Something like this? yo?

Let's now focus on the integral part of Connaisseur that is how to get all trusted digests for an `image:tag` or `image:digest` combination:

Connaisseur looks up trust data of the image in the `root`, `snapshot`, `timestamp` and `targets` files by querying the API of the notary server. Trust data syntax is validated against [their known schemas](https://github.com/sse-secure-systems/connaisseur/tree/master/connaisseur/res) (for an introduction to the trust data formats see the [presentation of our colleague Philipp Belitz](https://berlin-crypto.github.io/assets/Berlin%20Crypto%20Connaisseur.pdf)). Then, the files' signatures are validated against the pinned root key for the `root` file and against the respective keys validated in previous steps for later files. Connaisseur further gathers trust data of potential delegations linked in the `targets` file.

> At this point, Connaisseur is left with a set of potentially disjoint or overlapping sets of trust data. Connaisseur filters the trust data for digests that actually relate to the image in validation.

Reviewer: `in validation` --> `under validation`

> If the image policy rule that governs the image to be validated does contain a `delegations` field, Connaisseur checks whether one of the delegations' sets of trust data does not contain an entry for the image that is being validated, in which case the request is rejected. Otherwise, Connaisseur builds a set over the union of the digests and proceeds with step 2., i.e. accpeting if the size of the resulting set equals 1.

Reviewer: `accpeting`

Also, I'd rephrase the first sentence to avoid the negation: "field, Connaisseur makes sure that all delegations' sets of trust data do contain an entry for the image" (don't need to repeat "that is being validated"); "if that is not the case, the request is rejected".
